docs: [RFC] Add v1beta1 API RFC (#4274)
aws/karpenter: designs/v1beta1-full-changelist.md

# Karpenter v1beta1 Full Change List

This document formalizes the [v1beta1 laundry list](https://github.com/aws/karpenter/issues/1327) into a full change list of items that are coming in the migration from the `v1alpha5` APIs of Karpenter to `v1beta1`. This document purely describes the necessary changes and the rationale behind the changes. For the high-level overview of the API specs, view the [Karpenter v1beta1 Graduation](./v1beta1-api.md) design doc.

### Update Kind/Group Naming

As part of the bump to v1beta1, to allow the v1alpha5 APIs to exist alongside the v1beta1 APIs while users go through a migration process, the following renames are being proposed:

1. API Group Renames
    1. `karpenter.k8s.aws` → `compute.k8s.aws`
2. Kind Renames
    1. `Provisioner` → `NodePool`

>     2. `Machine` -> `NodeClaim`

Reviewer: How accurate is the “claim” analogy? It's not like I can adopt an existing running instance (cf. PersistentVolumeClaim, ResourceClaim), right? 

AIUI Karpenter's internal model is that it creates a Machine and then drives towards the desired state (healthy Node) by setting up instances.
You could even imagine a NodePool that has manual [ClickOps](https://www.lastweekinaws.com/blog/clickops/) provisioning with a team that should know better following some runbook to bring up a new node using the `poor-life-choice` node class.

Reviewer: I'm half convinced, but I still prefer Machine.

    3. `AWSNodeTemplate` → `NodeClass`

We see the renames as opportunities to better align our API groups and kinds with upstream concepts as well as reducing confusion between other Kubernetes API concepts. Specifically, the word `Provisioner` (on its own) has become overloaded in Kubernetes, [particularly in the area of storage provisioning](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/storage-classes/#the-storageclass-resource). We want to get completely away from this naming, while also prefixing all of our kinds that apply to nodes with `Node` for better alignment and clarity across the project. 

This gives the following naming to API types within the Karpenter project

1. `karpenter.sh/NodePool`
2. `karpenter.sh/NodeClaim`

> 3. `compute.k8s.aws/NodeClass`

Reviewer: If I have a cluster that uses AWS and (custom, not EKS Anywhere) on-prem nodes, what do I call the two different kinds? Are they both NodeClass in different API groups?

Author: Yes, we would expect that as we get more CloudProviders we would add more API groups but each API group would have the name `NodeClass`. This allows us to version each group separate from each other and give each of the cloudproviders some autonomy.

Reviewer: Annoying for people who want to `kubectl get NodeClasses` though. It won't work how most people would like, I imagine.

Reviewer 2: Could be solved with shortnames? Agree that, it's a touch awkward to have overlap, but I suspect it to be pretty rare. I'd hate the lose the simplicity in naming to account for a theoretical use case being more awkward. 

Frankly, kubectl should support overlapping kinds and return both!

Author: > kubectl should support overlapping kinds and return both

I feel like this starts to get complex when it comes to duplicate kind names from different API groups. Like, if you have two different nodeClasses from two different API groups with the same name, what happens when you do `kubectl edit nodeclass default`. It might start to get confusing to the user, at which point, a user just has to resort to specify the scoped resource name giving the full API group with `kubectl edit nodeclasses.compute.k8s.aws default` or some other cloudprovider to get the clarity they are desiring. 

I do doubt that we will have a lot of cross-cloud clusters using Karpenter (at least on the outset or maybe into the future) but the prospect of these naming conflicts does scare me a bit since they don't appear to be well-supported in K8s and fully based on the discovery order of the client.

Author: @sftim Did you have a recommendation on what to do here? I know projects like CAPI have resorted to just prefixing their kinds with the cloudprovider name like `AWSNodeClass`. Though I find that naming a little annoying as well.

Reviewer: > AWSNodeClass

That's what I'd do; I think it'd match end user expectations.

Karpenter v1beta1 will introduce CEL into the CRD OpenAPISpec while maintaining the webhooks until support for EKS versions <= 1.24 is dropped. At this point, we will drop support for the webhooks and rely solely on CEL for validation.

### Label Changes

### `karpenter.sh/do-not-evict` →  `karpenter.sh/do-not-disrupt`

Karpenter validates disruption across NodeClaims and determines which NodeClaims/Nodes it is allowed to disrupt as part of the deprovisioning flow. While eviction is part of the termination process, it’s more accurate to say that the `karpenter.sh/do-not-evict` annotation actually prevents Karpenter’s disruption of the NodeClaim/Node rather than the eviction of it.

###  `karpenter.sh/do-not-consolidate`  → `karpenter.sh/do-not-disrupt`

Karpenter currently surfaces the `karpenter.sh/do-not-consolidate` annotation to block consolidation actions against individual nodes without having to make changes to the owning provisioner. We have found this is useful for users that have one-off scenarios for blocking consolidation, including debugging failures on nodes. 

> While this feature is useful for consolidation, it should be expanded out to all disruption mechanisms, so that we have both pod-level and node-level control to block disruption using the `karpenter.sh/do-not-disrupt` annotation.

Reviewer 3: Is it possible to add this annotation also at the Provisioner/ NodePool level? This would allow an entire pool of nodes to be temporarily frozen for certain operation.

Reviewer 4: Hey @garvinp-stripe, there's a separate effort to include time-based controls that come with a `maxDisruptions` type field. The end state in conjunction with this proposal is that each TTL field can be enabled/disabled so that users can define which types of deprovisioning they want for a Provisioner/NodePool, and then in the same Provisioner/NodePool, users can define a schedule that determine how many nodes can be deprovisioned at a time, irrespective of the method. You would be able to set `maxDisruptions:0` to effectively freeze the Provisioner/NodePool.

Reviewer 3: Make sense, thanks

Currently fields that control node properties, such as `Labels`, `Taints`, `StartupTaints`, `Requirements`, `Kubelet`, `ProviderRef,` are top level members of `provisioner.spec`. We can draw a nice line between:

1. Behavior-based fields that dictate how Karpenter should act on nodes
2. Configuration-based fields that dictate how NodeClaims/Nodes should look

In this case, behavior-based fields will live in the top-level of the `spec` of the `NodePool` and configuration-based fields live within the `spec.template`.

On top of this, this interface is very similar to the Deployment/StatefulSet/Job relationship, where a top-level object spawns templatized versions of lower-level objects. In our case, this top-level object is the `NodePool` and the lower-level object is the `NodeClaim` (with the `Node` joining the cluster as a side-effect of the `NodeClaim`).

```
spec:
  weight: ...
  limits: ...
  template:
    metadata:
      labels: ...
      annotations: ...
    spec:
      taints: ...
      startupTaints: ...
      requirements: ...
      providerRef: ...
  deprovisioning:
    ttlUntilExpired: ...
    ttlAfterUnderutilized: ...
```

> #### `provisioner.Spec.ttl...` → `nodePool.Spec.deprovisioning.ttl...`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### `provisioner.spec.ttl...` → `nodePool.spec.deprovisioning.ttl...`
```

1. `ttlSecondsAfterEmpty=0` → Users want to delete nodes as soon as they go empty and Karpenter sees that they are empty
2. `ttlSecondsAfterEmpty >> 0` → Users want to delete nodes that are empty but want to reduce the amount of node churn as a result of high pod churn on a larger cluster

We anticipate that both of these scenarios can be captured through the consolidation deprovisioning mechanism; however, we understand that there are use-cases where a user may want to reduce the aggressiveness of Karpenter deprovisioning and only deprovision empty nodes. In this case, a user can configure the `consolidationPolicy` to be `WhenEmpty` which will tell the consolidation deprovisioning mechanism to only deprovision empty nodes through consolidation. Alternatively, you can specify a `consolidationPolicy` of `WhenUnderutilized` which will allow consolidation to deprovision both empty and underutilized nodes.

If `consolidationPolicy` is not set, Karpenter will implicitly default to `WhenUnderutilized`.

#### `provisioner.Spec.ttlSecondsAfterEmpty` → `nodePool.spec.deprovisioning.consolidationTTL`

> While the `consolidationPolicy` offers one mechanism for users to control the aggressiveness of deprovisioning, users that enable a `consolidationPolicy` of `WhenEmpty` or `WhenUnderutilized` may still want to dictate the speed at which nodes are deemed underutilized. This is particularly true on clusters that are large in size and have a large amount of churn. To support this, Karpenter will surface a `consolidationTTL` which will allow you to define a per-node TTL to define the time that Karpenter can begin deprovisioning the node after first seeing that the node is eligible for consolidation.

Reviewer: Depending on how much we like CEL, we could allow people to specify a _consolidation eligibility expression_.
(for early beta, that could be further constrained to say something like

“OK, but _for now_ the only supported expressions look like `node.secondsSinceEmpty >= *`, more later”

Author: > we could allow people to specify a __consolidation eligibility expression__

I'm curious what you're thinking here. Like define their own custom selector logic based on creationTimestamp or the lastTransitionTime of a condition field?

Reviewer: Not a selector, but broadly yes. However this is mostly an aside / tangent.

Reviewer 3: Expanding on this, it would be cool if eventually deprovisioning for all 5 types of deprovisioning can be controlled. Such as turning on and off each type of deprovisioning and the TTL.

#### Remove `nodePool.spec.provider`

We’ve recommended that customers leverage spec.providerRef in favor of spec.provider since Q2 2022. Documentation for this feature has been removed since Q3 2022. We will take the opportunity to remove the feature entirely to minimize code bugs/complexity and user confusion.

### `NodeClass` Changes

#### Update `nodeClass.spec.amiSelector`

> The current `amiSelector` has two primary limitations that restrict user’s ability to specify the AMIs that they want Karpenter to use:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The alpha API `amiSelector` has two primary limitations that restrict user’s ability to specify the AMIs that they want Karpenter to use:
```

1. Users can only specify “ANDed” together requirements, meaning that if a user has an orthogonal set of tags that they want to match their images to, they have to specify them by `aws::ids` directly, since there is no way with the current tag-selection logic to specify those values
2. Users want more flexibility to do things like specify a name/owner combination for images. Users have generally been asking Karpenter to more closely adhere to the EC2 APIs in our amiSelector design so that users can use more built-in filtering for AMIs, instead of having to use custom tagging to achieve the same outcome
    1. To support *some* of these use-cases, Karpenter has begun effectively creating “system-tags” i.e. (`aws::ids`, `aws::owners`, `aws::name`). These are special-cased version of the standard user custom-tags that allow users to achieve the scenarios described in #2; however, they are not easily discoverable or understood and if we are beginning to support special-cases like this, it makes sense that we should begin to structure these fields.

```
amiSelector:
- name: foo
  id: abc-123
  owner: amazon
  ssm: "/al2/alias"
  tags: 
    key: value

> # Selectors are ORed

Reviewer: Not in Kubernetes they're not! I'd avoid calling this a selector.

Author: Good callout. Is this the reason that they are called `NodeSelectorTerms` in [`nodeAffinity`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/generated/kubernetes-api/v1.23/#nodeselector-v1-core:~:text=NodeSelectorTerm%20array)? Maybe we should model this the same way with `amiSelectorTerms`?

Reviewer: Even `nodeSelectorTerms` is an AND expression. I would use a word other than selector, especially as the backing API doesn't look (or work) like a Kubernetes one.

If we call it a selector, people who know a different mental model - ie, actual selectors - may assume it works just like those ones.
There's a related concern. Imagine that Kubernetes one day adds a logical-OR mechanism. Once we stabilise this API it's difficult to revise it, so the Karpenter “selectors“ might be stuck working similarly to actual selectors, but frustratingly not the same.

Reviewer: As a thought experiment, try expressing these requirements first using EC2's `Filter` API and then using a Kubernetes-style selector:

- AMI must **not** be public
- AMI must be for AMD64 CPU architecture
- AMI must have a tag set on it, `example.com/kubelet-minor-version`
- Volume type must be `gp2` or `gp3`

I think that's a reasonable filter and it's one you can specify using the underlying API. So, we should consider allowing it. But we can't make that API look enough like a Kubernetes selector (even the [set-based requirement](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/labels/#set-based-requirement) kind), because there are different ergonomics here. The problem actually isn't the OR expression, now I think about it; it's what we set the keys to. Actual node selectors rely on automatic labelling, but I'm worried about whether it's feasible to map AWS tags to look like label keys.

---

Calling it a filter (and, to be clear, automating the migration for people using the older API) avoids people having to learn the subtle traps here.

More importantly, I think: a future change to the EC2 `DescribeImages` operation might make us want to expose more ways to filter images. The more that we try to adapt that API to look like Kubernetes, when it isn't really, the bigger the risk of future trouble - and problems that AWS' internal API change review process is unlikely to account for.

Author: > Even `nodeSelectorTerms` is an AND expression

The [K8s documentation](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/generated/kubernetes-api/v1.26/#:~:text=NodeSelectorRequirement%20v1%20core) mentions that these terms are ORed

<img width="680" alt="Screenshot 2023-07-30 at 10 35 36 PM" src="https://github.com/aws/karpenter/assets/26334334/7af02f4a-39cf-4b3c-bcc3-d3a2e28775fe">

Author: > I'm worried about whether it's feasible to map AWS tags to look like label keys

I think, generally, the user has complete control over these tags (if they are using tag-based selection) so ideally we shouldn't hit conflicts with label selection mechanisms in Kubernetes. I'm still leaning towards calling it a `selector` with terms since it's more K8s-native and the purpose of these API fields is a "selection"-based mechanism

Reviewer: I do tech writing (and cloud consultancy) and I try to avoid APIs where you end up having to write things like “**NOTE** This looks like a selector in Kubernetes but isn't the same, here are a list of differences that might catch you out”.

Given that experience sometimes I look upstream to see where hard-to-document things are popping up. That's all the context I can offer, anyway. I think this will be hard to document and I worry that there will be a steady stream of slightly confused people adopting this API.

Author: > This looks like a selector in Kubernetes but isn't the same, here are a list of differences that might catch you out

I'm slightly confused by this statement. I'm missing what exactly is different about this mechanism other than the service that it is interacting with. In all other ways, it should behave the same as selectors that interact directly with the K8s API server.

- name: foo
  id: abc-123
  owner: self
  ssm: "/al2/alias"
  tags: 
    key: value
```

#### Update `nodeClass.spec.subnetSelector`

`subnetSelectorTerms` should have a similar parity to the `amiSelectorTerms` in its design to improve the ease-of-use for users. As a result, we should design the `subnetSelectorTerms` in the same spirit as the `amiSelectorTerms` such that you can also specify multiple selectors through `tags` and `ids` that can be ORed together to produce the ultimate set of items that you want to use.

```
subnetSelectorTerms:
- id: abc-123
  tags:
    key: value
# Selectors are ORed
- id: abc-123
  tags:
    key: value
```

#### Update `nodeClass.spec.securityGroupSelector`

The same logic for `subnetSelectorTerms` applies to `securityGroupSelectorTerms`. We should have a similar parity to the `amiSelectorTerms` to improve the ease-of-use around this selector.

```
securityGroupSelectorTerms:
- id: abc-123

>   name: default-secuirty-group # Not the same as the name tag

Reviewer: (typo)

  tags:
    key: value

> # Selectors are ORed

Reviewer: I reread how the actual [`DescribeSecurityGroups`](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/APIReference/API_DescribeSecurityGroups.html) API works. You can specify multiple _values_ (eg, ask for two different tag values for the same key, and accept either) but the “key” part requirements are ANDed together.

Author: Yep. Maybe what's confusing is how I worded the comment. What I _meant_ was that the selector terms are ORed but the actual selector itself is ANDed.

> - id: abc-123
>   name: default-security-group # Not the same as the name tag
>   tags:
>     key: value
> # Selector Terms are ORed
> - id: abc-123
>   name: custom-security-group # Not the same as the name tag
>   tags:
>     key: value

Reviewer: Could do this:
```suggestion
- id: abc-123
  tags:
    use: private-subnet
# Selector Terms are ORed
- name: custom-security-group-b # Not the same as the Name tag
  tags:
    use: private-subnet
- tags:
    use: private-subnet
    Name: custom-security-group-c # not the same as the name field
```

```

#### Remove `nodeClass.spec.launchTemplate`

Direct launch template support is problematic for many reasons, outlined in the design [Unmanaged LaunchTemplate Support for Karpenter](./unmanaged-launch-template-removal.md). Customers continue to run into issues when directly using launch templates. Rather than continue to maintain these sharp edges and give users a half-baked experience of Karpenter, we should remove this field, considering that we can always add it back later if there is enough ask from users to do so.

#### `nodeTemplate.spec.instanceProfile` → `nodeClass.spec.role`

> Currently, Karpenter uses an `instanceProfile` in the `AWSNodeTemplate` that is referenced to determine the profile that the EC2 node should launch with. Instance profiles are IAM entities that are specific to EC2 and do not have a lot of detail built around them (including console support); users are generally more familiar with the concept of IAM roles. As a result, we can support a `role` in the new `NodeClass` and allow Karpenter to provision the instance profile `ad-hoc` with the `role`  specified attached to it.

Reviewer: If I want to use an instance profile and _not_ allow Karpenter to manage that, can I still have that option?

Author: What would be the reason that you would want to use your own instance profile. I think we can add this back if we hear enough asks for it but there doesn't seem to be a strong enough reason to keep it when there is a 1-1 mapping between a role and an instance profile

Reviewer: I might want to use a role that some other code has made, along with an instance profile.

Author: Still not sure that I get the full use-case. It doesn't seem likely to me that you would have a hard requirement to utilize a specific instance profile that must be manually specified. To me, it seems like you would enforce this restriction at the role level.

Reviewer: If the instance profile already exists, what behavior / error do I see?
If I stop using that role, does Karpenter try to delete the instance profile that is no longer needed?

Author: Karpenter will surface the instance profile through a discovery mechanism and resolve this instance profile into the AWS `NodeClass` status. If the role changes, Karpenter should go and cleanup the old role assignment and update it with the new one. 

We should be generating the instanceProfile with a similar mechanism to `generateName` so that it is sufficiently random that we are unlikely to have collisions; however, if we do have a collision, we should just try to regenerate a random value again.

Reviewer: OK, cool. There need not be a 1-to-1 mapping though. _n_ instance profiles can map to 1 role (right?)

Given that Karpenter is going to manage instance profiles, I might want:
- to specify a custom `path` for the instance profile
- to set custom tags on the instance profile

More likely: I restrict the IAM role that Karpenter runs as. The restrictions enforce tag-on-create for instance profiles, and expect certain tags to be set. Karpenter is then only allowed to delete or update instance profiles that have the appropriate tag.

### Update Kind/Group Naming

As part of the bump to v1beta1, to allow the v1alpha5 APIs to exist alongside the v1beta1 APIs while users go through a migration process, the following renames are being proposed:
As part of the bump to v1beta1, to allow the v1alpha5 APIs to exist alongside the v1beta1 APIs while users go through a migration process, the following kind names are being proposed:

1. API Group Renames

>     1. `karpenter.k8s.aws` → `compute.k8s.aws`

Reviewer 5: @jonathan-innis, I am curios what prompted the reversal of the original plan?
